Free cam scene editor changes (#628)
defold/doc: docs/en/manuals/scene-editing.md

---
title: The Defold scene editor
brief: The Scene Editor is where you edit collections, game objects, GUIs, particle effects and other visual assets. This manual explains selection, tools, and how to navigate the scene view in 2D and 3D—including free camera mode and camera settings.
---

# The Defold scene editor

The **Scene Editor** is the visual editor used to build and edit scenes such as collections, game objects, and other visual assets.

By default, many visual scenes open with a **2D orthographic** view. For 3D work you can switch to a 3D-oriented layout, enable a 3D grid plane, and use a **perspective** camera.

## Opening the Scene Editor

Open the Scene Editor by double-clicking a visual resource in the *Assets* pane, such as:

- **Scene structure** — collections (`.collection`), game objects (`.go`)
- **2D assets** — atlas (`.atlas`), tilemaps (`.tilemap`), sprites (`.sprite`), tile sources (`.tilesource`)

> - **3D assets** — models (`.model`, `.glb`)

Reviewer: '+ `.gltf`)'

> - **3D assets** — models (`.model`, `.glb`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **3D assets** — models (`.model`, `.glb`, `.gltf`)
```

- **Rotate/Orbit (3D) around selection**
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>/<kbd>^ Control</kbd> + <kbd>Left Mouse Button</kbd>

You may also use **Frame Selection** (<kbd>F</kbd>) to focus the camera on the current selection.

## 2D and 3D scene orientation

The scene view can be used in both 2D and 3D workflows:

- In **2D**, you typically work in an orthographic view with a 2D-oriented grid.
- In **3D**, you typically:
  - Realign the view to a 3D orientation,
  - Use a **perspective** camera,
  - Choose an appropriate grid plane (often **Y** for “ground”).

You can access these functions via the toolbar and the **View** menu.

![Scene Editor 3D](images/editor/3d_scene.png)

## Toolbar overview

In the top-right of the scene view there is a toolbar with commonly used tools and view options (left to right):

- **Move tool** (<kbd>W</kbd>)
- **Rotate tool** (<kbd>E</kbd>)
- **Scale tool** (<kbd>R</kbd>)
- **Grid Settings** (`▦`)
- **Align/Realign Camera 2D/3D** (`2D`) — toggles between 2D and 3D orientation (shortcut <kbd>.</kbd>)
- **Camera Perspective/Orthographic**
- **Visibility Filters** (`👁`)

![Toolbar](images/editor/toolbar.png)

## Selecting and manipulating objects

> ### Manipulating objects

Reviewer: Manipulating -> Selecting (this section is actually about selecting, below is manipulation like move, rotate etc)

> ### Manipulating objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Selecting objects
```

- **Grid opacity**
  Controls how transparent the grid lines are. Lower values make the grid less intrusive while still providing a reference.
- A **Reset to Defaults** button
  Restores all grid settings to their original values.

## Camera type: Perspective vs Orthographic

The Scene Editor supports both:

- **Orthographic** camera (common in 2D workflows)
- **Perspective** camera (common in 3D workflows)

Use the camera toggle in the toolbar to switch. In 3D scenes, perspective navigation usually feels more natural.

## Free Camera Mode

For fast 3D navigation, the Scene Editor provides **Free Camera Mode**, a first-person / “FPS-style” camera.

### Activating Free Camera Mode

- Hold <kbd>Right Mouse Button</kbd> — Free Camera Mode is active as long as the button is held
- <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>`</kbd> (backtick) — toggles Free Camera Mode on, keeping it active after release

::: sidenote
On some keyboard layouts (e.g. Swedish) the backtick key is a dead key and may not trigger the shortcut as expected. You
can rebind this shortcut in `File ▸ Preferences ▸ Keys` and enter a shortcut for `Scene -> Free Camera -> Activate`
:::

> 

Reviewer: Add a note about frame highlighting e.g. When Free Camera Mode is active the Scene View is highlighted with a border line.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When Free Camera Mode is active the Scene View is highlighted with a border line.

```

### Exiting Free Camera Mode

- Release <kbd>Right Mouse Button</kbd> (when activated by hold), or

> - <kbd>Left Mouse Click</kbd>, <kbd>Right Mouse Click</kbd> (press and release), or <kbd>Esc</kbd> (when activated by toggle)

Reviewer: Suggested:

Click <kbd>Left Mouse Button</kbd>, click <kbd>Right Mouse Button</kbd>, or press <kbd>Esc</kbd> when Free Camera Mode was activated as a toggle.

> - <kbd>Left Mouse Click</kbd>, <kbd>Right Mouse Click</kbd> (press and release), or <kbd>Esc</kbd> (when activated by toggle)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click <kbd>Left Mouse Button</kbd>, click <kbd>Right Mouse Button</kbd>, or press <kbd>Esc</kbd> when Free Camera Mode was activated as a toggle.
```

### Looking around (mouse look)

While Free Camera Mode is active:

- Move the mouse to control **yaw** (left/right) and **pitch** (up/down)
- Pitch is clamped to avoid flipping the camera

You can also optionally invert the Y axis (see **Free camera settings** below).

### Moving

> While Free Camera Mode is active:

Reviewer: Since W/E/R are also Move/Rotate/Scale tools, it would help to clarify that these keys control the camera *only* while Free Camera Mode is active.

Suggested:

While Free Camera Mode is active, these keys control camera movement (instead of editor tools):

> While Free Camera Mode is active:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Free Camera Mode is active, these keys control camera movement (instead of editor tools):
```

- <kbd>W</kbd> — forward
- <kbd>S</kbd> — backward
- <kbd>A</kbd> — left
- <kbd>D</kbd> — right
- <kbd>E</kbd> — up
- <kbd>Q</kbd> — down

::: sidenote
All movement keys can be rebound in `File ▸ Preferences ▸ Keys`. Then search for `Scene -> Free Camera`
:::

Speed modifiers:

- Hold <kbd>Shift</kbd> — move faster
- Hold <kbd>Alt</kbd>/<kbd>⌥ Option</kbd> — move slower / more precisely

### Walking mode (optional)

Free Camera Mode supports **Walking Mode**.

When enabled:

> - Up/down movement is constrained so navigation behaves more like walking on a ground plane.

Reviewer: Maybe: "movement is constrained to behave more like grounded first-person walking on a ground plane."

> - Up/down movement is constrained so navigation behaves more like walking on a ground plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Up/down movement is constrained to behave more like grounded first-person walking on a ground plane.
```

- This is useful when exploring a level and you want consistent “grounded” movement.

## Camera settings popup

The perspective camera button in the toolbar has a settings popup for camera-related preferences.

![Perspective Camera Settings](images/editor/camera_popup.png)

The popup contains:

- **Move Speed**
  Adjusts free camera movement speed.

- **Look Sensitivity**

>   Up/down movement is constrained so navigation behaves more like walking on a ground plane. This is useful when exploring a level and you want consistent “grounded” movement.

Reviewer: This description is probably for "Walking Mode", not "Look Sensitivity"

Reviewer: Maybe: "Adjusts how quickly the camera rotates in response to mouse movement."

>   Up/down movement is constrained so navigation behaves more like walking on a ground plane. This is useful when exploring a level and you want consistent “grounded” movement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Adjusts how quickly the camera rotates in response to mouse movement.
```
